---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: 50 Shades of Grey Hats: <br />A<h3>Question of Ethical Coding Practices</h3>
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2020-04-23
labels:
  - Software Engineering
  - Ethics
  - Career
---

Ethics may seem black and white to some, but for most it lives in a shady, grey world. This is not necessarily my point of view, it just is. At this moment, people are actively engaging in unethical behavior across all spectrums of society. The expression "moral compass" is often used to define one's ethical behavior, but unlike a compass that always points due North, morals vary from region to region, culture to culture, person to person. For each rule, whether written or unspoken, there is always another side to the story or some argument to be made that allows for loopholes. Unfortunately, this is also the case when it comes to technology. 

There are times when a software engineer’s intent is undermined by evildoers, and other times a program designed for nefarious reasons is ultimately used for good. Technology is used for just about everything nowadays so when we talk about ethics in technology, or ethics as it applies to software engineering, we are really just talking about ethics, period. For example, an app designed to bring people together to talk about religion might be used to start a cult. Social media and dating apps are often used for [human trafficking](https://polarisproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/A-Roadmap-for-Systems-and-Industries-to-Prevent-and-Disrupt-Human-Trafficking-Social-Media.pdf). Zoom, now used by millions as we are forced to work online, is very likely being used to actively engage in [corporate espionage](https://time.com/5818851/spies-target-americans-zoom-others/). 

In the article, <span style="text-decoration:underline">The code I’m still ashamed of</span> (Sourour, 2016), Bill Sourour talks about being recruited to build a survey site for a marketing firm sponsored by pharmaceutical companies. Initially, Bill trusted everything was on the up and up, especially considering the reputation of the clients, but after building the site, he realized he played a part in a scheme to get teenage girls hooked on prescription drugs (ultimately led to their demise), and promptly quit the job, and seemed to express remorse, or at least shame.

The article resonated with me because my son is now working in an unremunerative software engineering job (which is kind of an oxymoron) in a sort of quasi startup incubator funded by a multimillion-dollar company in Japan. Similar to Bill's younger years, my son receives free room and board (not from me though), and gets the opportunity to work on high level projects without the same burdens or time constraints levied on senior engineers. Nothing in life is free of course. There are hidden costs to working in Japan, and hidden costs to working in this type of environment. Occasionally, he is asked to work on projects that are in the grey zone. His defense is the culture is different. I understand some social norms there would never fly here, and they have to keep Yakuza in mind at times, but in my mind, if you are too ashamed to reference a project on a resume, something is wrong. It makes sense for companies to seek out enthusiastic, yet inexperienced software engineers because it can be a bit of a safety net. A conditional ternary for this situation might look something like this:

```javascript
ifCaught ? blame_on_scapegoat : make_money
```

What could go wrong, right? The recruits see it as an opportunity to hone their skills and build up their resume, while employers take advantage by having the employee work on small sections of code that senior software engineers may not want to be associated with. Unfortunately, unlike Bill’s moment of clarity, many people turn a blind eye to what is happening and deflect by telling themselves it is the company that is unethical, they are simply providing a skill set. It is true to some extent, in a competitive market there will always be someone ready to fill the void. Does that make it right? How would you feel if you find yourself in Bill's situation?

In Bill's story, he claims he did not know what was happening until it was too late. In my previous line of work, we were notorious for stove piping. Access to information was always on a “need-to-know” basis. One could argue it was important to keep secrets safe, but in reality this practice carries the inherent risk of people engaging in "you-don't-want-to-know" types of behavior. Bill resigned upon discovering his website indirectly led to a string of teenage suicides, but at what point did he realize something was amiss? Problem solving is the very essence of programming. My hunch is he was smart enough to know early on he was in the wrong, and then smart enough to know when to jump ship. That is the problem. Many people will question, but not many people will take a stance at the right time. My advice is to be mindful, stay alert and aware of what you are coding, why you are coding, and for whom are you coding, etc. The best right is right before the wrong, but let's be honest, we rarely get things right the first pass, so as in Bill's case, the best course of action is to learn from mistakes, acknowledge you did something wrong and try not to repeat the same mistake.

All is not lost however, as the message is getting out there that we must be proactive in avoiding unethical situations. For example, it is becoming increasingly common for college graduates to [opt-out](https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/carolineodonovan/silicon-valley-tech-companies-recruiting-protests-ethical) of working for companies that do not align with their moral standards. People are actually declining cold call offers from companies such as Amazon, who not surprisingly ranks as the number one unethical company according to [ethicalconsumer.org](https://www.ethicalconsumer.org/retailers/five-unethical-companies) What does this mean? Two things...1) As more companies fail to recruit ethical programmers, they will end up hiring unethical programmers. 2) More jobs for the rest of us. 
